                         PBT (Polybutylene Terephthalate)                 Page 1 of 2

General information

Overview

 The use of PBT as an engineering material arises more due to its balance of good properties rather than to
 any outstanding properties.

Strengths

 Lower melting temperature than PET - good for processing. Better electrical resistance than PET and
 exceptional tracking resistance, good resistance to aliphatic hydrocarbons, alcohols, and ethers. Relatively
 low friction, better dimensional stability than PA (particularly in water), low susceptibility to stress cracking
 in hydrocarbon oils, crystallizes faster and so is more suited for injection molding than PET.

Limitations

 Lower Tg than PET meaning lower heat distortion temperatures. Swollen by low molecular weight esters,
 ketones, and partially halogenated hydrocarbons. Susceptible to hydrolysis. Not as tough as PC, abrasion
 resistant as PA, heat resistant as PSU or PEK, and does not have the low water absorption of a modified PPO.
 It is a polyester so has relatively poor chemical resistance, particularly at temperatures above Tg. High mold
 shrinkage, prone to warping due to high differential shrinkage, notch sensitive compared with competitive
 materials, less stiff and strong than PET but tougher.

Designation

 PBTP, poly(tetramethylene terephthalate), PTMT

Typical uses

 45% Electronics/electrical applications, 32% automotive. Electrical connectors, gears, heat-resistant panels in
 domestic and electrical goods, under-bonnet and exterior parts for cars, light fittings and reflectors,
 switches, bobbins, brush holders, integrated circuit carriers.

Composition overview

Compositional summary

 (O2C-C6H4-CO2-(CH2)4)n

Material family          Plastic (thermoplastic, semi-crystalline)
Base material            PBT (Polybutylene terephthalate)
CAS number               26062-94-2
Effect of composition

Very large number of grades available - up to 40 from some manufacturers, including glass/carbon fiber
reinforced, mineral filler, impact modified, elastomer modified, fire retardant, and combinations of these. Fire
retardant grade is more difficult to process due to the lower thermal stability if halogenated additives are
used. Also slightly reduced tensile and impact strength. Glass fiber significantly improves flexural modulus,
impact strength, and creep resistance. Partially replacing the terephthalic acid with a longer chain aliphatic
dicarboxylic acid improves notched impact strength. Grafting approx. 5% ethylene and VA onto the backbone
improves toughness. PBT/PC blends are used for car bumpers. PBT/PET and PBT/ASA blends allow for good
surface finish even when glass-reinforced.

                         ANSYS, Inc. provides no warranty for this data.
                              PBT (Polybutylene Terephthalate)                                              Page 2 of 2

Processing properties

Feedstocks & production

 Terephthalic acid and butane-1,4-diol

First commercial production             1972
Forming

Thorough drying before molding required. PBT decomposes rapidly at temperatures above 270 °C (520 °F)
and so melt temperatures must be maintained below this. Short molding cycles due to rapid crystallization,
high injection speeds recommended for good surface finish, very difficult to blow-mold, difficult to extrude
and rotational mold, good for injection molding and structural foam-molding.

Machining

Easy to machine

Joining

 Easy to bond (epoxies, cyanoacrylates, silicones, and polyurethanes). Solvent bonding difficult due to
 solvent resistance, though hexafluoroacetone sesquihydrate can be used (toxic). Suitable for all types of
 welding (except radio freq.). Some grades suitable for laser welding.

Surface treatment
 Very suitable for painting.

Notes

Warning

 The best flame retardant additives for PBT are brominated diphenyls and brominated diphenyl ethers, and
 the use of these is restricted in some countries (due to bioaccumulation concerns).

                                        ANSYS, Inc. provides no warranty for this data.
