                       PC (Polycarbonate)                               Page 1 of 3

General information

Overview

 PCs are tough thermoplastics. It is the second largest volume engineering resin produced (after nylon).Due to
 its useful engineering properties over a wide temperature range, PC has become established in applications
 requiring a combination of properties, particularly impact resistance, and clarity.

Strengths

 Very high transparency (though not quite as high as e.g. COC - 88% vs. 91-2%), high surface gloss, available in
 any color and color intensity. High impact resistance, stiffness, and strength across a broad temperature
 range (-150 to +135 ｰC (-240 to +275 ｰF)), better impact resistance than ABS at temperatures above -40 ｰC (-40ｰ
 F). Good electrical properties (which are not affected by moisture), very good resistance to high-energy
 radiation - easily sterilizable. Self extinguishing, low creep.

Limitations

 Hot water causes a gradual chemical decomposition accompanied by a loss of impact strength (though
 hydrolysis-resistant grades are available). Lower impact resistance than ABS below -40 ｰC (-40ｰF), notch
 sensitive with a low long-term alternating fatigue strength, limited abrasion resistance. Ideally should be UV
 stabilized on exposed surfaces, otherwise will eventually show yellowing (much better resistance than
 unstabilized ABS though) - with UV stabilization shows excellent resistance. Limited chemical resistance,
 significantly susceptible to stress cracking. Very high CO2 permeability, necessitating a barrier layer (e.g. of
 PET or PBT) when producing bottles for CO2-containing liquids. High melt viscosity.

Typical uses

 The largest markets for PC are electrical/electronic (computer/business equipment and optical discs), glazing
 and sheet usage, and the automotive industry. The largest consumer is China at approximately one third of
 world consumption. Approximately 15% of all PCs are used for the production of blends particularly with
 10-50% SAN or ABS. Supersonic aircraft canopies, safety shields and goggles, lenses, glazing panels, business
 machine housing, instrument casings, lighting fittings, safety helmets, electrical switchgear, laminated sheet
 for bullet-proof glazing, twin-walled sheets for glazing, kitchenware and tableware, microwave cookware,
 medical (sterilizable) components.

Composition overview

Compositional summary

 Generically, the carbonate of a diol with generic formula (-R-O-(C=O)-O-)n. Standard PC is the carbonate of
 bis-phenol A (BPA), formula (-O-C6H4-C3H6-C6H4-O(C=O)-)n.

Material family        Plastic (thermoplastic, amorphous)
Base material          PC (Polycarbonate)
CAS number             25037-45-0
Effect of composition

                       ANSYS, Inc. provides no warranty for this data.
                             PC (Polycarbonate)                               Page 2 of 3

Free flowing grades available for production of large-sized parts and CDs though these have slightly reduced
flexural modulus, notched impact strength, and heat distortion temperature. Glass/Carbon fiber
reinforcement is possible with significant stiffness increases, particularly at high temperatures. Fiber
reinforcement also reduces susceptibility to stress cracking. Addition of graphite, PTFE or MoS2 improves
wear and friction properties (which are otherwise poor) at the expense of processability and general
mechanical properties. Inclusion of aluminum powder improves the electrostatic shielding of housings. Fire
retardant grades suffer reduced impact strength compared with unmodified PC.

Processing properties

Feedstocks & production

 Usually manufactured from bisphenol A (or other diols) and phosgene. Bisphenol A derived from phenol
 and acetone.

First commercial production  1958
Forming

Can be processed and post-treated by all standard thermoplastic processing methods - blow-molding,
extrusion, injection molding, rotational molding, and vacuum-forming. High melt viscosity requires high
injection pressures or relatively low ratios of flow distance to wall thickness. Drying for 4-24 hr is required to
reduce residual moisture to below 0.01-0.02%. Mold shrinkage is negligible, and processing shrinkage is
around 0.7%. Extremely thin films can be cast with solutions of PC in methylene chloride. Pellets containing
foaming agents can be used to produce large integral foamed parts.

Machining

Very easy to machine

Joining

 Bonding with adhesives or reaction resins is possible. Solvent bonded items should be dried just below the
 expected maximum service temperature to help prevent crazing. Very suitable for friction, hot plate, and
 ultrasonic welding, suitable for hot gas welding. Not radio freq. Can be welded to PBT, PEI or ABS. Laser
 welding possible. Thin films can be heat sealed. Self-tapping (cutting) screws can be used though should be
 replaced with standard screws for repeated dis/assembly. Soft (e.g. aluminum), smooth edged rivets can be
 used, suitable for snap-fits and ultrasonic staking; metal inserts should be avoided for parts undergoing
 thermal cycling.

Surface treatment

 Suitable for painting.

Notes

Warning

                             ANSYS, Inc. provides no warranty for this data.
PC (Polycarbonate)                               Page 3 of 3

Standard PC is manufactured from bisphenol A (BPA), which has been associated with estrogenic effects at
high doses. There is concern that it may leach from PC into food due to degradation of PC by water
(hydrolysis) or contact with cleaning chemicals such as bleach. The stance from the FDA is that based on the
current data, BPA is safe for use in its FDA approved applications - food containers and packaging - though it
is no longer used in some applications such as children's drinking cups. Alternatives include lining PC
containers with PET film, replacing PC coatings with PET, or substitution in molded products with BPA-free
alternatives such as Tritan copolyester.

ANSYS, Inc. provides no warranty for this data.
