                             PET (Polyethylene Terephthalate)                 Page 1 of 2

General information

Overview

 PET was originally only used to produce fibers for clothing (polyester). In the last three decades, its use for
 blow-molded drinks/food containers has become highly significant due to its generally good properties and
 superiority to glass for such applications (particularly in terms of brittleness and strength to weight ratio).

Strengths

 Good water vapor and oxygen barrier. High strength and stiffness (for commodity/engineering
 thermoplastic), Excellent transparency/clarity, practical and established recycling, low friction. Good low
 frequency electrical properties, good melt flow, good resistance to gamma radiation (allows for
 sterilization), very good surface finish. Easily colored, can be optically transparent, clear, translucent or
 opaque.

Limitations

 Unfilled PET is problematic to injection mold compared with PBT. Very susceptible to heat degradation in
 amorphous form (less so when semi-crystallized), burns easily (unless fire retardant grade used), can release
 harmful fumes during processing, poor heat distortion temperature. High mold shrinkage, limited resistance
 to hydrolysis, limited usefulness below 0 °C (32 °F) (becomes brittle). Cannot be steam sterilized due to low
 hydrolysis resistance.

Designation

 Often the specific polymer referred to as polyester, even though polyesters are a broad class.

Typical uses

 Amorphous: Blow-molded bottles, packaging film, film, photographic and X-ray film, audio/visual tapes,
 industrial strapping, capacitor film, drawing office transparencies, fibers. Semi-crystalline: Electrical fittings
 and connectors, audio/visual tapes, industrial strapping, capacitor film, fibers.

Composition overview

Compositional summary

 (CO-(C6H4)-CO-O-(CH2)2-O)n

Material family              Plastic (thermoplastic, semi-crystalline)
Base material                PET (Polyethylene terephthalate)
CAS number                   25038-59-9
Effect of composition

Amorphous grades have better clarity and barrier properties than semi-crystalline grades. Voluminous
comonomers such as isophthalic acid or 1,4-cyclohexane dimethylol are used to lower crystallinity for
production of transparent parts. Gas barrier properties can be further improved for specialized application
by multi-layering with polyvinyl alcohol.
Unmodified grades have high elongation. Glass-fiber reinforced grades are tough and strong though
dimensional stability can be problem. Mineral-filled grades are used to counter warping and shrinkage, but
some strength is lost.

                             ANSYS, Inc. provides no warranty for this data.
                             PET (Polyethylene Terephthalate)                                               Page 2 of 2

Processing properties        1941

First commercial production
Forming

Low screw speed required, thorough pre-drying (10 hr) required to prevent hydrolytic degradation.
Suitable for thermoforming. Can be processed by blow-molding (one and two stage), injection molding,
extrusion, and vacuum-forming.

Machining
 Poor machinability.

Joining

 Suitable for bonding with cyanoacrylate, EP or PUR adhesives. Very easy to friction and hot plate weld.
 Difficult to ultrasonic weld and very difficult to hot gas or radio freq. weld. For the hot plate method,
 contactless heating is best to prevent sticking to the plate.

Surface treatment
 Very suitable for painting. Mineral filled grades suitable for plating.

Notes

Warning

 Can release harmful fumes during processing. Fire retardant additives are very susceptible to thermal
 degradation, releasing noxious fumes. There have been worries that the antimony trioxide catalyst used in
 production may cause antimony to leech into the contents of PET bottles but studies have concluded that this
 is not a concern.

Other notes

 Suitable for use in food packaging. Well suited for over-molding of metal inserts as long as the wall
 thickness is sufficiently high (despite high shrinkage).
 Semi-crystalline grades available.

                             ANSYS, Inc. provides no warranty for this data.
